You will need (serves 6-8)

- 6-8 x 180ml ramekins
- large roasting pan or ovenproof dish
- blowtorch (optional)

Ingredients

- 568ml (1pt) double cream
- 200ml whole milk
- 10 large egg yolks
- 75g caster sugar (for the custard)
- 1 vanilla pod
- 50g caster sugar (for the topping)

1. Preheat the oven to 130C

2. Prepare a kettle full of boiling water.

3. Put the egg yolks and sugar in to a large mixing bowl (large enough
to also hold the milk and cream as well as the eggs), and whisk until
blended. You just want to mix them, you're not trying to beat lots of
air in to them, so do this gently by hand rather than with an electric
mixer. Put this to one side.

4. Pour the cream and the milk in to a saucepan (you can replace the
milk with another 200ml of cream if you want, that gives a heavier
custard at the end).

5. Split the vanilla pod in two, scrape out the seeds, add them to the
pan, and then put the vanilla pod in too.

6. Heat gently, until almost boiling.

7. When the milk + cream + vanilla is almost boiling pour it carefully
over the eggs + sugar and gently whisk until it's blended. Again,
don't try and beat air in to it.

8. In a fresh saucepan (or, thoroughly clean out the one you were
using, it's very important that there's no remaining milk in it), pour
the eggs + sugar + milk + cream + vanilla in, and put back on a low
heat. Stir it gently and frequently, and scrape the bottom and edges
of the saucepan too. You're waiting for it to start to thicken
up. It's thick enough when you can take the spoon you're stirring it
with out of the mixture and it stays on the spoon, instead of all
running off ("coats the back of the spoon", as most recipes say). This
normally happens within 5 minutes or so, depending on how hot the milk
was.

This is the point where it can all go horribly wrong -- if the heat's
up too high you don't get custard, you get scrambled eggs. If that
happens, take it off the heat, pour in to another cool bowl, and whisk
it vigorously until the lumps disappear, then put it back on a gentler
heat and keep stirring.

9. Once it's thickened take it off the heat, and remove the vanilla
pod.

10. Transfer the mixture in to the ramekins. Use a ladle, or just pour
it all in to a measuring jug, and go from there. Let it come almost to
the top of the ramekins. If your custard's not completely smooth you
can strain it through a sieve.

11. Place the ramekins in to the roasting dish, and then pour boiling
water around them, so it looks like they're sat in a bath. You want
the water to come at least halfway up the ramekins, 2/3rds is great
too. If you need to top it up with non-boiling water that's fine.

12. Transfer to the oven, and bake for 35-40 minutes. You can give
them a gentle shake to check that they're ready -- they should wobble
a bit, but shouldn't look liquid. Don't poke them, there'll be a skin
on top, and you don't want to break that.

13. Take them out of the water bath, and let them cool completely. At
this point they should look golden on top, pale yellow underneath,
with flecks of vanilla in them.

14. When they're cooled put them in the fridge until you're ready to
serve them.

15. When you're going to serve them scatter a tbsp of sugar on top. I
normally then hold them up, and gently tap them on the side with the
ramekin at a bit of an angle to make sure it's evenly
distributed. Don't put the sugar on any earlier, otherwise it will
just slowly dissolve in to the custard.

16. Then caramalise the sugar. Either use a cook's blowtorch, or if
you don't have one to hand you can put them back in the roasting tin,
fill it with *ice* water, again up to 1/2 to 2/3rds of the way up the
ramekins, and then put them under a very hot grill for 3 to 4
minutes. That's not as much fun as a blowtorch though.

17. Leave for a minute to set, and then serve.
